# SQL Professional Database Design

## Introduction

In this module, we will dive into the importance of constraints and abstraction layers such as views, functions, and stored procedures in professional database design. Along with that, there are code snippets to see what an example of this code would look like. Finally, we will see how transaction statements are used in stored procedures.

## Recommendation

### Constraints

Constraints are important in SQL so our inputs do not contain any buggy values. They are an extra layer of security in case the functions that input items to the tables do not have their own dedicated security. One example of what this might be good for is if a company has an **Inventory** table. We would never want to have the quantity for a certain item inside the **Inventory** to be less than 0 because it could potentially break the front-end logic and even crash applications that don’t have this edge case checked. This can be done using the “CHECK” constraint to make sure the quantity is always greater than 0. An example can be seen below in Figure 1.

```sql
CREATE TABLE dbo.Inventory (
    ItemID int NOT NULL,
    Quantity int CHECK (Quantity >= 0)
);
```
> Figure 1: An example of a CHECK constraint in SQL Server

Having constraints makes your database more robust and secure, which are very important qualities of a professional database.

## Views, Functions, Stored Procedures

Views, functions, and stored procedures are all very similar in nature. If the user wants to read data from the database, these three can provide the user an output that is read only. This means the user can never modify the underlying structure of data. As changes in the database happen over the years, the output of these abstraction layers can be changed so existing applications based off these structures don’t break. 

If the user wants to create, update, or delete data from the table, stored procedures can double check to make sure the user’s actions are valid and that the data modified will not break any existing frameworks built around the database. Note that views and functions can only provide read output, and cannot write to the database.

One example of a breaking change the user could perform is to attempt to create a new continent in a **Continents** table in a **WorldMap** database. Creating a new continent that didn’t exist would not make sense. The function or stored procedure could stop this from happening. You can see below in Figure 2 that we will roll the transaction back if the insertion fails. We assume that the table checks for existing continents in a static list.

```sql
CREATE PROC pInsertContinent (
    @ContinentName varchar(100),
    @ContinentAreaFeet double
) AS
    BEGIN
        BEGIN TRY
            BEGIN TRANSACTION
                INSERT INTO dbo.Continents (ContinentName, 
                                            ContinentAreaFeet)
                VALUES (@ContinentName, @ContinentAreaFeet);
            COMMIT TRANSACTION
        END TRY
        BEGIN CATCH
            PRINT Error_Number();
            PRINT Error_Message();
            ROLLBACK TRANSACTION
        END CATCH
    END
```
> Figure 2: A stored procedure example that will rollback a transaction if it fails

These transactions also allow database administrators to provide return codes for debugging purposes, to make sure the function runs as intended.

All of these features combine to make a robust set of tools that administrators can use to ensure their database is secure, professional, and easy to use for front-end developers.
Transaction Statement Usage

As seen above in Figure 2, transaction statements are valuable in stored procedures. If the user enters invalid information, or the command causes an error, the stored procedure will rollback the transaction and it will be as if nothing has happened to the existing underlying table. It is a failsafe and another layer of security for the database.

## Summary

In this module, we talked about the benefits that constraints have in terms of sanitizing input to a table, as well as why using abstraction layers are so beneficial in professional databases. We also explored the importance of transactions inside stored procedures, and how they provide an extra layer of security. 
